[1_Caulobacter crescentus]

The life of a cell is simple in theory, and complex in practice. Think about the evolutionary purpose of your cell.  Fundamentally, it is to grow, amassing enough resources to eventually multiply itself. How best to grow, though, depends on the environment and what's available to use as fuel. Different species have evolved different strategies to optimize their growth. In a world of scarce resources and fierce competition, any adaptation that lets your cell grow more efficiently can have a big effect on its success. Often these adaptations are visible in the structure of the cell, as you'll see in this chapter.

You've already seen how the shape of your cell can allow it to gather nutrients from the environment more efficiently. For example, Haloquadratum walsbyi uses a flat shape to maximize its exposure to sunlight for photosynthesis. Alternatively, prosthecate bacteria like Caulobacter crescentus use long, thin extensions to increase surface area relative to volume, allowing them to absorb more nutrients. Let's examine these extensions more closely.

The extra surface area of a stalk can increase your cell's ability to absorb nutrients, but it also adds a lot of membrane that can dilute membrane proteins and increase the time it takes them to diffuse around the cell. C. crescentus stalks get longer throughout their lifetime, so the problem only gets worse with age. As an engineer, how could you solve this problem? What if you could separate the envelope of the stalk from the envelope of the rest of the cell? C. crescentus cells like this one have evolved an elegant way of doing this: stalk bands. These protein structures form diffusion barriers for the membranes and periplasm, but not the cytoplasm. Each cell division produces another band in the elongating stalk, so you can tell a cell's age by counting its bands.




 [2_Shewanella oneidensis]

Other cell extensions also help metabolism. Non-photosynthetic cells break down nutrients into chemical energy (ATP) through respiration reactions. The chemistry is beyond the scope of this book, but it involves the transfer of electrons to an acceptor molecule, typically oxygen (the "aer" in aerobic respiration). When oxygen isn't present, some cells can use an alternative electron acceptor, such as iron or sulfur, in a process called anaerobic respiration. This works well when the acceptor is soluble and can diffuse into the cell. But what if the only available acceptor is trapped in a mineral? Shewanella oneidensis like this one have evolved a workaround: they extend outer membrane vesicle chains. Electron carriers in the membrane [Schematic – Cytochromes] shuttle electrons to metal oxide minerals in the environment, a conductive property that lends the appendages the name "nanowires." The morphology of S. oneidensis nanowires is similar to that of other outer membrane vesicle chains, with tubular and pearled sections. Here the nanowire has detached from the cell.  You can also see metal deposits on the cell's envelope, which it is presumably using for respiration.

Other species, like Geobacter sulfurreducens, also use nanowires to transfer electrons to an insoluble acceptor in the environment, but the structure of these nanowires is very different: a long filament made from stacked cytochrome proteins, resembling a pilus (thin protein filaments you'll see in Chapters 6 and 9).


4_2_1 Schematic: Cytochromes
This model shows the arrangement of cytochromes (red and green dots) on the section of S. oneidensis nanowire you saw on the main page. The membrane is colored in gold.




[3_Rhodopseudomonas palustris]

What if your cell gathers energy from sunlight; how can you make that process more efficient? Photosynthetic bacteria harvest light energy using protein complexes [Schematic – Photocomplexes] embedded in their membranes. It seems intuitive to increase the light-gathering capability of such a cell by adding more membrane. But then the cell's volume would also increase. How could you get around this problem? Why not stack the extra membrane in the cytoplasm? Many (but not all) photosynthetic bacteria contain intracytoplasmic membrane, or ICM. In cells like this Rhodopseudomonas palustris, the ICM is continuous with the inner membrane and forms stacks at the middle of the cell. Different species can have different, and more extensive, arrangements [More – ICM variety].

4_3_1 Schematic: Photocomplexes
In the ICM, the light-harvesting photocomplexes are themselves highly organized. As you can see here, the complexes comprise hundreds of individual proteins and can reach tens of nanometers in size. Physically tethering enzymes that function in the same pathway increases efficiency by allowing the enzymes that catalyze subsequent steps to hand off substrates. You'll see more examples of this theme in the rest of the chapter; metabolic enzymes in the cell are often clustered together into relay teams.

[3a_Methyloprofundus sedimenti] More: ICM variety
In some species, like this Methyloprofundus sedimenti, the ICM is even more extensive and appears to be fully separated from the cell membrane. As you can see, it occupies much of the cytoplasmic space.



[4_Chloroflexi]

Another approach to accommodate additional enzymatic workers is to put them in a dedicated factory. Rather than extending their membranes, some bacteria, like this Chloroflexi, use dedicated structures called chlorosomes to pack together many light-harvesting complexes. This approach of bringing together enzymes that function in the same metabolic pathway is a common way cells increase efficiency. 


#[Clostridium thermocellum]
#
#Increasing the number of workers (like photocomplexes) is a good way to increase output, but another approach would be to make them more efficient. One of the easiest ways to increase the efficiency of metabolic pathways is to bring the associated enzymes together to form an assembly (or disassembly) line. Such factories are common inside cells, and even outside. Clostridium thermocellum like this cell use an enzymatic factory called the cellulosome to break down insoluble cellulose for fuel. Cellulosomes contain many, many proteins – enzymes as well as scaffolding proteins that extend the structure out from the cell envelope, giving the enzymes better access to cellulose in the environment [Schematic – Cellulosome architecture].
#
#While C. thermocellum can utilize insoluble cellulose in the environment, they prefer other, soluble sources of carbohydrates and if one is available, the cell won't produce cellulosomes. This flexibility is a hallmark of bacteria and archaea, which live in complex and ever-changing environments. (More on that in Chapter 8.)
#
#Schematic – Cellulosome architecture





[5_Thiomonas intermedia]

You might be able to increase the efficiency of your factory even further by enclosing it in a dedicated building. Many bacteria (but not, as far as we know, archaea) do this by forming microcompartments–areas of the cytoplasm walled off by a protein shell [Schematic – Microcompartment shells]. One of the most impressive microcompartments is the carboxysome that some bacterial species use for carbon fixation (the breakdown of carbon dioxide into usable fuel molecules). Carboxysomes contain tightly packed copies of an enzyme called ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, or more simply, RuBisCO, which, incidentally, is the most abundant enzyme on Earth. The shell does more than simply concentrate the enzymes. Oxygen competes with carbon dioxide for binding RuBisCO, so the bacteria include another enzyme in the compartment which converts bicarbonate into CO2, making it readily available to the RuBisCO. The shell may also slow down the diffusion of CO2 out, and O2 in. Carboxysomes probably weren't necessary in early cells because the oxygen level of the environment was much lower. Cells like this Thiomonas intermedia contain many carboxysomes. While most are icosahedral, there is variation in their forms [More – Carboxysome variety].

Microcompartments can protect their contents from the rest of the cell, or they can do the reverse. Some metabolic pathways generate toxic intermediates, so bacteria have evolved microcompartments to sequester them so they don't interfere with other processes in the cell. 

4_5_1 Schematic: Microcompartment shells
Bacterial microcompartments are typically enclosed by a self-assembling shell formed by just a few proteins. The shell is icosahedral, consisting of hexameric units packed into flat planes, which are joined together by pentamers at the vertices. You can see this arrangement in the shell structure of a microcompartment called an encapsulin that helps Thermotoga maritima respond to stress.

[5a_Halothiobacillus neapolitanus] More: Carboxysome variety
Most carboxysomes look like the ones you saw on the last page, but some look different. Some are less regular polyhedra, as in this Halothiobacillus neapolitanus cell. And some are stranger still [More – Long carboxysomes].

[5b_Hydrogenovibrio crunogenus] More: Long carboxysomes
These carboxysomes in a Hydrogenovibrio crunogenus cell have grown abnormally long, extending across its width. These are unusual, but more minor elongations are common.

This cell also highlights the lability in the outer membrane common in some bacteria, particularly pathogens. Note how the cell has curled inside its loose outer membrane. You can also see it stretching across to another cell in a neighboring hole; they were probably just finishing division when they got pulled apart.


[6_Cupriavidus necator]

No matter how efficient your factories are, they need raw materials, and in an ever-changing environment, your cell can't always depend upon a steady supply chain. How can you help your cell cope with occasional shortages? If you said stockpile, you're in good agreement with Nature. Both bacteria and archaea use storage granules to stockpile essential nutrients. The substrate is usually polymerized for easier packing, like poly-phosphate or the poly-hydroxybutyrate in these granules in Ralstonia eutropha. No matter what they pack, storage granules are generally spherical, and exhibit a range of sizes [More – Storage granule growth]. When the environment is rich in one nutrient but poor in another, cells may stop growing, but keep adding to their cellular stores. You can see that effect in this C. necator cell which has been cultured in a medium with carbon but not enough nitrogen; as a result, it has accumulated very large poly-hydroxybutyrate granules which take up much of the cytoplasmic space.

Storage granules are ubiquitous in bacteria, and you'll see them in many of the cells in this book. The most common type is poly-phosphate, which has a characteristic dark appearance in electron microscopy images.

[6a_Lysobacter antibioticus] More: Storage granule growth
Storage granules expand and contract to accommodate their contents. This Lysobacter antibioticus cell exhibits a typical range of sizes of poly-phosphate granules.





[7_Agrobacterium tumefaciens]

Some storage granules, like the poly-phosphate and poly-hydroxybutyrate granules you just saw, are very densely packed and clearly delineated from the rest of the cytoplasm. Other types are less tightly packed and more amorphous, like the ones in this Agrobacterium tumefaciens cell. We don't know yet what these contain.

In some species, like Ralstonia eutropha, storage granules seem to be positioned randomly in the cell. Other species have more regulated arrangements. A. tumefaciens cells always have one poly-phosphate storage granule located near the cell pole. Other species have one at each end of the cell, as you'll see on the next page. As you'll see in Chapter 5, this arrangement can help mother cells pass on a storage granule to each of their daughters during division.






[8_Hydrogenovibrio crunogenus]

There seems to be a relationship between bacterial microcompartments and storage granules. For instance, small poly-phosphate storage granules are sometimes seen inside carboxysomes, as in this Hydrogenovibrio crunogenus cell. 

[9_Halothiobacillus neapolitanus]

We also sometimes see comb-like structures connecting external poly-phosphate storage granules with carboxysomes, as in this Halothiobacillus neapolitanus cell. The nature of the relationship between the structures, and the identity and function of the combs, remains a mystery.





[10_Halorubrum litoreum]

Archaea also use storage granules, and you'll see many examples throughout the book. Compared to the smooth edges of bacterial granules, the edges of archaeal granules are spikier, giving them a rougher appearance, as in this Halorubrum litoreum cell.













