[1_Caulobacter crescentus]

Location, location, location. So far, we’ve been talking about how your cell can take the best advantage of its spot in the world. But why not find a better spot? Some cells live stationary lives, attached to a surface or embedded in a biofilm (more on these lifestyles in Chapters 8 and 9). But many cells are explorers, using an impressive variety of techniques to move through their environments, finding advantages in places with more food or fewer competitors. How would you go about making your cell a mobile home?

Most bacteria and archaea live in liquid, so motility means swimming. When you’re the size of a cell, though, the backstroke won’t get you very far. A rough measure called the Reynolds number describes the relative influence of inertia and viscosity on liquid flow, and this parameter scales with an organism’s size. In the low-Reynolds number world of microbes, inertia is virtually nonexistent. When a rod-shaped bacterium stops swimming, it gets to coast only about the diameter of a hydrogen atom (~1Å) before stopping. In this molasses-like environment, rotary propellers work much better than paddles.

Nearly all bacteria that swim use the same propeller: a rotary motor embedded in their envelope that spins a long helical fiber called a flagellum [Schematic–Flagellum structure]. Flagella, like the one on this Caulobacter crescentus, are typically many times longer than the cell and take the form of a 3D wave [More–Flagellum morphology]. 

6_1_1 Schematic: Flagellum structure
The helical filament of the flagellum is made up of many copies of one or a few flagellin proteins. Each flagellin monomer has a soluble head domain and a hydrophobic alpha-helical tail that bundles together with the tails of other monomers to form the hollow tube. The tube comprises 11 protofilaments. [EMD-8847]

[1a_Campylobacter jejuni] More: Flagellum morphology
Flagella are dynamic, as you’d expect. Throughout the book, you’ll see examples caught in various conformations: straight, curved, or in a typical loose helical waveform as you see on this Campylobacter jejuni cell. 




[2_Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus]

Let’s take a closer look at the machinery of the motor that spins the flagellum. Broadly, we can break it down into a stationary part (the “stators”) that anchors the machine in the cell and a rotating part (the “rotor”) that spins the flagellum. A universal joint called the hook connects the filament to the machine’s rotor. We can see these components more clearly by averaging individual motors from many cells to get a composite view [More–Flagellar motor structure].

The torque for spinning the flagellum comes from small movements in the stators that kick the rotor in a circle. The energy for these movements comes from the ion potential across the cell membrane that we discussed in Chapter 2; the stators provide a conduit for protons (in most species) or sodium ions (in some marine species) to diffuse down their chemical gradient into the cytoplasm, powering a conformational change in the stators in the process. The energy demands of the machine are high: a single rotation requires about 1,000 protons to flow through the stators, and the motor may spin at more than 6,000 rotations per minute. The fact that cells pay this energetic cost indicates a strong evolutionary selection for motility, or in other words, the powerful advantage your cell can gain by learning to swim.

While the basic plan of the motor is the same in every species with flagella, there are structural differences that reflect the different environments species encounter [Schematic–Flagellar motor diversity]. 

[2a_Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus] More: Flagellar motor structure
This is an average of the flagellar motors from many Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus cells. Working outward from the base, the major parts of the rotor are the C-ring (for Cytoplasmic), the MS-ring (for Membrane and Supramembrane), the rod, the hook, and finally the filament. They are surrounded by stationary parts: the stator ring (which is dynamic and so doesn’t resolve well) and a series of bushings that allow rotation within the cell wall (the Periplasmic or P-ring) and outer membrane (Lipopolysaccharide or L-ring). Additional cytoplasmic components form the export apparatus involved in assembly (discussed on the next page).

6_2_1 Schematic: Flagellar motor diversity
As you can see in these averages of flagellar motors, different species of bacteria have evolved structural adaptations to better fit their environments. For instance, if your cell is a pathogen colonizing an animal’s respiratory tract (like Pseudomonas aeruginosa), it will be swimming in more viscous conditions and may therefore have evolved a wider stator ring to generate more torque, along with reinforced anchors in the cell wall and outer membrane to withstand that added torque.


[3_Hylemonella gracilis]

Operating the flagellar motor is impressive, but so is building it in the first place. Remember that the envelope of bacterial cells is a complicated multilayered barrier. The flagellar motor has about two dozen unique components, each present in many copies, embedded in every layer of the cell envelope, with parts in the cytoplasm, periplasm (if the cell is a diderm), and extracellular space. How can your cell get all hundred or more components (tens of thousands if you count the components of the filament) where they need to go? Making the feat even more impressive, the machine builds itself, assembling from the inside out. First the components associated with the inner membrane come together, forming an “export apparatus” which pumps subsequent components across the membrane to assemble in the periplasm and outer membrane (if the cell is a diderm). The energy for this process comes from an ATPase at the base of the machine. You can see a late stage in this assembly process in this Hylemonella gracilis cell. The final piece to be assembled (still missing here) is the flagellar filament, which continues to assemble outward; flagellin monomers travel through the hollow tube to take their places at the tip. Flagellar motors can also disassemble, for instance when the filament is broken [More–Flagellar motor disassembly], and cells may make many new flagella throughout their lifetime.

So the flagellar motor is not just a machine for motility; it is also a machine to secrete molecules outside the cell. Bacteria and archaea contain many such “secretion systems,” each specialized to transport specific macromolecules (e.g. DNA or a toxin protein) across cell envelopes – both their own and sometimes others. Secretion systems are classified by evolutionary relatedness; there are currently ~10 types recognized in bacteria, some of which are also present in archaea. The flagellar motor is an example of a Type III Secretion System. You’ll see another member of this family in Chapter 9, and example of many other types in the rest of the book, starting in just a few pages.

[3a_Pseudomonas aeruginosa] More: Flagellar motor disassembly
When flagella break, or in some species like Caulobacter crescentus are ejected so the cell can attach to a surface, the motor is disassembled, usually beginning with the export apparatus. Not everything is dismantled, though; the P- and L-rings remain in place in the cell wall and outer membrane, respectively, as you can see in this Pseudomonas aeruginosa cell. We’re not sure if there’s a reason for leaving them there, but one possibility is that they may function as a plug when the hook is absent.



[4_Campylobacter jejuni]

Once assembled, flagella can work in different ways. The motor is bidirectional, and can rotate either clockwise or counterclockwise. Depending on the number and location of flagella on the cell (and the cell’s shape), this can push the cell, pull it, or give rise to even more complicated swimming behavior. Some bacterial species, like the Caulobacter crescentus and Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus you saw at the beginning of the chapter, are monotrichous (“single haired”), with one flagellum located at one pole to push/pull the cell. Other species, like the Campylobacter jejuni here, have bipolar flagella–one at each end. Still others are lophotrichous (“crest-haired”), with a clump of flagella [More–Lophotrichous bacteria]. 

[4a_Helicobacter pylori] More: Lophotrichous bacteria
Many lophotrichous species, like the Hylemonella gracilis you saw in Chapter 3 or this Helicobacter pylori, have a tuft of flagella at their cell pole. In some species, though, the tuft is located elsewhere; a clump of flagella on the concave side of banana-shaped Selenomonas artemidis pushes cells sideways in a seesawing swimming pattern.



[5_Pseudomonas flexibilis]

Still other species are peritrichous (“hair around”), with multiple flagella distributed randomly around the cell, as you can see in this Pseudomonas flexibilis. The well-known model system Escherichia coli is also peritrichously flagellated. In this scheme, when the flagellar motors are all rotating one direction (counter-clockwise), the flagella form a whip-like bundle that propels the cell to “run” in a straight line. When one or more motors switch to clockwise rotation, the flagella dissociate from the bundle and “tumble” the cell to face a new direction. In the next chapter, you’ll see how cells use this behavior to seek out favorable spots.



[6_Helicobacter hepaticus]

You may have noticed that some of the flagella you’ve seen in this chapter were enclosed within the outer membrane of the cell. We call these “sheathed” flagella. It’s a common adaptation in pathogenic species, like this Helicobacter hepaticus. Flagella offer pathogens a great advantage in colonizing their hosts; hosts in turn have learned to use them to identify potential invaders. As a result, the innate immune response of many eukaryotes, from plants to insects to humans, has evolved to recognize the telltale and abundant signal of flagellin monomers in the long filament. If your cell aims to take up residence in such a host, it could therefore benefit from hiding this strongly antigenic feature.



[7_Borrelia burgdorferi]

If your cell is a pathogen, swimming can be very useful, but so can burrowing, for instance between cells in host tissue. How could your cell do this? Why not turn itself into a corkscrew with the equipment at hand? Some cells do just this, wrapping their flagellum around their body to back out of a tight spot, or burrow into one [More–Bacterial invasion]. Other, diderm species like the Borrelia burgdorferi here have turned the temporary adaptation into a permanent one: they assemble their flagella inside the cell envelope, with the filaments wrapping around between the cell wall and outer membrane. These “periplasmic” flagella are usually multiple, arising from one or both ends of the cell, and pack together, forming a helical ribbon. This helical ribbon helps give these Spirochetes (“spiral haired”) their characteristic shape; mutants that can’t make flagella are simple rods. Some spirochetes have additional features that may help them move around in animal hosts [More–Treponema primitia]

[7a_Macaca mulatta] More: Bacterial invasion
This unidentified bacterium has burrowed between the microvilli of a Rhesus macaque colon. You can see the sheathed flagellum wrapping around the cell body like a corkscrew.

[7b_Treponema primitia] More: Treponema primitia
Treponema primitia like this are commensal residents of the termite gut, helping break down cellulose. In addition to two periplasmic flagella, cells have arrays of bowl and hook-like structures on their surface, the function of which remains mysterious.





[8_Methanoregula formicica]

Archaea swim, too. And as you might expect, they use similar machinery to do so: an envelope-embedded motor that spins a long extracellular filament. Despite the structural similarity, the machinery evolved independently, another indication of the strong advantage conferred by swimming. To reflect this similar-but-not-the-same character, we call the archaeal analogue of the bacterial flagellum the archaellum. Unlike the flagellum, which is a Type III Secretion System, the archaellum is a Type II Secretion System. As you can see in this Methanoregula formicica cell, archaella are narrower than flagella [Schematic–Archaellum structure]. The motor is also different [Schematic–Archaellar motor structure], and uses the ATPase at the base not just for assembly, but also to power the rotation for swimming. Like flagella, archaellar motors can rotate either direction, resulting in the filaments pushing or pulling the cell.

6_8_1 Schematic: Archaellum structure

6_8_2 Schematic: Archaellar motor structure




[9_Thermococcus kodakaraensis]

Similar to flagella in bacteria, different archaeal species employ different numbers and patterns of archaella. Some cells have one, others have many, either distributed peritrichously (all around) as in the Methanoregula formicica you just saw, or lophotrichously (clumped) as in this Thermococcus kodakaraensis. In T. kodakaraensis and related species, an additional structure–a large conical plate–is seen in the cytoplasm, perhaps providing leverage for the multiple motors. The plate has a unique structure [More–Cone structure] and may act as an organizing center akin to the polar PopZ structure we discussed in the last chapter [More–Organizing center].

[9a_Thermococcus kodakaraensis] More: Cone structure
The cone doesn’t come to a point at the tip, but rather is a conical frustum (open at the top), resembling a lampshade. In the center of the tip is a small ring, as you can see in top view in this lysed, flattened Thermococcus kodakaraensis cell. We don’t yet know the function of this ring; perhaps it helps nucleate the rest of the structure?

[9b_Thermococcus kodakaraensis] More: Organizing center
As you can see more clearly in this partially-lysed, flattened Thermococcus kodakaraensis cell, the conical structure in the cytoplasm is attached to more than just the archaella. It is also associated with chemosensory arrays (discussed in the next chapter) and DNA, as you can see from the ribosome-excluding zone. This structure may therefore perform an analogous function to bacterial organizing proteins such as PopZ, tethering cellular components into a de facto pole for, in this case, a round cell.




[10_Myxococcus xanthus]

If your cell lives on a surface, what’s the best way to get around? How about using a grappling hook? Some bacteria, like this Myxococcus xanthus, use a Type II Secretion System related to the archaellar motor to pull themselves around their environment. As you can see, the structure looks familiar: a motor embedded in the envelope with a long extracellular filament. In this case the filament is called a pilus (“hair” in Latin). Bacteria and archaea make many kinds of pili (also generically called fimbriae (“fringe”)) and you’ll see some of their other functions in later chapters. The M. xanthus pili, classified as Type IV pili, don’t function as propellers like flagella or archaella, but rather extend, attach to a surface, then retract to pull the cell toward the attachment point [Schematic–Type IV pilus structure]. The pilus motors are the strongest known in nature, and can retract pili at up to 1 μm/s; the combined action of multiple pili leads to extremely rapid “twitching” motility over the surface. The motor structure, or basal body, remains intact even when no pilus is assembled. These rod-shaped cells have many basal bodies at both cell poles; to switch direction, the cell simply disassembles the pili on one end and builds new pili from the machines on the other.

In addition to attaching to a surface, the pili can also attach to another M. xanthus cell. This enables the cells to move over surfaces en masse. Combined with their predatory practice of eating other bacteria, this property has led them to be compared to packs of wolves hunting down their prey.

6_10_1 Schematic: Type IV pilus structure
A series of rings anchor the basal body in the cell envelope. This rigid structure provides leverage for an ATPase at the base to rotate an adaptor in the inner membrane. We think that when it spins in one direction, the adaptor scoops pilin monomers diffusing in the inner membrane into the assembling pilus. Once the pilus has reached its target, attachment is sensed by the basal body (we still don’t know how). As a result, the assembly ATPase dissociates and a second, homologous ATPase takes its place. This disassembly ATPase spins the adaptor in the opposite direction, escorting pilin monomers back into the inner membrane, ready to join another growing pilus.



[11_Flavobacterium johnsoniae]

Other bacteria use different machinery to move over surfaces. Flavobacterium johnsoniae like this cell use a Type IX Secretion System to secrete adhesive filaments. These filaments move on a helical track around the cell, and thereby the cell moves forward on a surface. The power for this gliding movement is thought to come from rotary motors anchored in the cell wall that propel the adhesins along their track in a rack-and-pinion fashion, but we still don’t understand the mechanism in detail.




[12_Mycoplasma pneumoniae]

Another, familiar, way to get across a surface is to walk. For this to work, though, you need to be able to change the conformation of your body. This is possible if your cell lacks a cell wall or surface layer, like this Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Like the Mycoplasma genitalium you saw in Chapter 2, these cells are intracellular pathogens, so they don’t need to buttress their membrane against differences in osmolarity. As a result, they are conformationally flexible. This may allow them to use a leg-like internal structure called a terminal organelle [Schematic–Terminal organelle structure] to crawl, or more elegantly “glide,” across a surface. The exact mechanism is still unclear, but one possibility is that a hinge-like conformational change in the terminal organelle extends and contracts the back of the cell with respect to the front, similar to the movement of an inchworm (but less exaggerated). Combined with adhesion proteins on the cell surface, this might propel the cell forward. 

The skeleton-like terminal organelle gives these cells their characteristic flask shape. In combination with their minimal cell envelope, it can also give rise to an unusual method of cell division. In some species (or mutants) that lack the division protein FtsZ, Mycoplasma cells still manage to divide. They replicate their terminal organelle normally as you can see this cell has done and then the two copies simply walk away from each other, stretching the mother cell between them until the membrane spontaneously separates to produce two daughters.

Keep in mind that these are simply some of the ways we already know bacteria and archaea get around, and we continue to discover new ones.

6_12_1 Schematic: Terminal organelle structure
